Workbook Overview & Guidelines 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
This workbook is a structured guide for students to follow as part of Problem Solving in 
Engineering (PSE) – IP-3 Experiential Learning Course 
Follow the modules outlined in this workbook, you will adopt and practice systems thinking 
methodologies to solve real-world problems in a systemic manner.  
Until now, you spotted a problem or a gap, you thought of an idea and you developed a 
prototype. The downside of this rushed problem solving is that the root cause of the problem 
is not addressed and hence the problem can recur or newer problems can appear. Metaphor 
recall – 10-headed snake. 
Through this course we want you to choose a system to fix instead of a problem. 
You will learn and apply Systems Thinking methods to formulate the problem and develop 
resilient, robust and sustainable solutions. 
How to Use This Workbook 
• Collaborative Teams: Work in mixed-disciplinary teams of 3-5 team members. 
• Active Writing: Use the fillable workspace to document your team's discussions, 
data, models, design and new system design architecture. 
• Technology Agnostic Philosophy: The work book is generic and not bound to a 
disciplinary domain. It will guide you with methods and tools. You are expected to 
build your system awareness and expand your understanding by referring to links at 
the end of each module and apply them to your specific case. 
• Iterative Progression: You will begin with Module 1, but the progress is not intended 
to be linear from module 1 to 6. It is recommended that you move back and forth from 
Module 1 to 4 as per your research and investigation. The best results will come if you 
do not remain stuck in a module. Keep the momentum alive and progress to 
subsequent modules while keeping an option open to come back and work on previous 
modules. 
• Process over Product: In your first iteration of the workbook, you will develop the 
abilities to think in systems. Your solution may not be the best fix. The goal is to learn 
how to adopt systems thinking and rapid prototyping, not to create a flawless product. 
Continue the journey of PSE and you will be able to propose better system fixes in 
your next round of iterations. You can start with a fresh workbook. 
Gen AI Usage Guidelines 
• Establish context: Introduce yourself with your role in the project, project objectives 
and expectations and limitations that warrant use of AI 
• AI Roleplay: Define what role will AI play in this partnership, e.g. 
Assistant/Critique/Writer/Advisor/Peer-Reviewer/Subject Matter Expert of [ ] 
• Set Scope: Specify AI deliverables and expectations clearly, some examples; 
◦ Cite sources 
◦ Exclude opinions not backed by strong evidence 
◦ Restrict all references to count of [ ] citations or published journals 
◦ Support information with reasoning 
◦ Provide data but do not analyse and draw conclusions 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
◦ Skip ice-breaking sentences and do not bring social human-like flavour to the 
responses 
◦ Provide contradicting perspectives as an unbiased observer 
◦ Question my assumptions and ask for my reasons to my claims 
Affected System (Problem Area) Selection 
Identify a problem area or affected system that you would like to take up as your project 
in PSE (IP-3).  
Select a Super System 
For example: Transportation& Sustainable Mobility System 
Select a Specific Sub System (Problem Area) to focus on: 
For example: TGSRTC – Telangana State Road Transport System –  
Specific Location: Hyderabad. 
Specific Issue – Protests 
Specific Focus – Driver and Conductor 
Problem Area if identified (Describe the local pain point in 2-3 sentences): 
For example: TGSRTC Driver and Conductor Health Condition - TGSRTC has faced 
protests over long working shifts (12-15 hours) of the drivers and conductors and the 
impact on their physical and mental health. 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Module 1: Drafting the Project Informatics Document (PID) 
Scoping Real-World Challenges and Building the Project Informatics Document 
Module Targets/Outcome 
• Scope a specific, localized problem within India (for e.g., Hyderabad IT corridor, rural 
Telangana). 
• Formulate a Project Informatics Document (PID) establishing system boundaries, 
stakeholders, and physical interfaces/data baselines. 
Study the System where the problem is observed 
Describe what is happening in the System. Use 5W2H suggested below to guide your 
inquiry. 
Please Note: This is an As-Is State representation and should NOT be mixed with the 
“should be” state.  
Collect all the background data about the problem area from official sources. (e.g., citing 
reports from NITI Aayog, MoHUA, or local municipal bodies), web based links, news 
articles, research papers, reviews, stakeholder interviews etc. 
The data or information is inadmissible if the sources are not cited 
All the claims must be backed with evidence. No evidence, No Claim 
At the end, your PID must have a statistical base and facts and figures. 
Keep in mind: 
● Are the sources official, recognised and citable? 
● Is every claim backed by facts and figures? 
● Is there enough measurable/quantified content to draw conclusions? 
● If there are multiple sources citing conflicting claims, which ones would you refer 
to and what conclusions would you draw from the conflict? 
● What are the associated assumptions? 
● What variables influence the observed claims? What changes when the 
variables change and is there enough evidence to this? 
Important Note: Keep your choice of technology area out of the context at the time of 
drafting PID. The focus is on the Problem area and evolving a deeper understanding 
of the system in which the problem exists. Do NOT investigate with a pre-conditioned 
mindset that you know the problem. Capture Symptoms and the context around the 
symptoms but do not associate it with an assumption which cannot be validated with 
data. You do NOT know the real problem yet. 
5W2H Strategy relevant for PID 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
WHAT is/are the SYMPTOMs (Effect) of the problem observed?  
WHO is affected most by the problem? (Stakeholder group 1) (List all) 
WHO is Causing the Problem? (List all if applicable) (Stakeholder Group 2) 
WHEN (Time patterns) is the Symptom happening? (Should contrast with the times when 
the symptoms are not occurring) 
WHERE (Space context) is/are the symptoms observed? (Should eliminate the locations 
where the problem does not occur) 
HOW is the process cycle observed? (How does the information or data move from one 
state to another?) (Draw a life cycle diagram or a flow chart) 
HOW MUCH is the impact? Each claim above must be backed by the data/statistics. 
Provide count and cost. 
Instructions: 
Use this space to record all relevant observations, facts, statistics, stakeholder inputs, reports, 
research findings, and other supporting information related to the selected problem area. 
Focus on collecting information rather than analysing it or proposing solutions.  
Additional sheets may be attached if more space is required. 
Write the Problem Statement (preliminary) 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
State the Problem in less than 100 words. This is your current understanding of the 
problems observed in the System. In case of multiple problems observed, mention as 
many as you have observed. 
● Are these problems related to each other? 
● What is the Causal relationship between the problems? 
● Which one problem do you observe to be the cause of other problems if they 
are found related? 
● Is there an obvious vicious loop (feedback loop) that causes the problems to 
compound? 
Define the System 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
List all the components of the System. Each component is defined by its function.  
For example; a part could be the role a person plays and not the name of the person 
itself. A Part could be a Smartphone User Interface, Installed Applications, Camera, 
Phone User, Retail shop, Price, Model etc. 
After you have listed all components that you can think of, connect components to 
each other to indicate the relationships between the components and form a System 
map. The connectors could be one-way or two-way arrows suggesting how the 
components interact with each other. For better understanding the relationship can be 
written on the connector. 
Watch the Video “Understanding Systems” on Youtube with link provided at the 
end of the module 
Example: System Map of a Drug Manufacturing supply chain. 
Define the System Boundary (Scope) 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
The system boundary defines what is included within the scope of your study and 
what remains outside it (the environment). The inputs drive the function of the system. 
The output from the system can be classified as desirable and not-so-desirable (waste) 
output. 
Example given: System Map of a Drug Manufacturing Supply Chain System where the 
problem area focus is on supply chain from manufacturing to retail encircled within 
the system boundary depicted as dashed. 
Inputs are identified as green arrows entering into the scope of your system from the 
environment and outputs are identified as red arrows leaving the environment. 
Note: The dotted boundary will be the scope of the System which you will be working 
on. 
(The scope of your system can be modified later to change the sub systems you     
intend to work upon.) 
Stakeholder Map 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Primary Stakeholder Map: List at least three distinct stakeholder groups and their 
primary needs. 
For Example: 
Stakeholder: Paddy Farmers  
Need: Android mobile camera interface, localized voice-over output [Cite Source]. 
Note: If your project involves more than three stakeholder groups, you can always add 
additional entries. 
1 Stakeholder:  
Needs:  
2 Stakeholder: 
Needs:  
3 Stakeholder:  
Needs:  
Feel free to include more key stakeholders and their needs. Sometimes the stakeholders are 
not directly visible but they are critical to the system because they influence the system from 
far. 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Quantitative Baseline Data: State at least two localized statistics or data points 
relevant to your problem from your PID. Cite sources. 
For example:  
Data Point: Mobile internet penetration in rural Telangana has crossed 68%, but 
network bandwidth in fields remains highly unstable (averaging less than 1.5 Mbps 
upload speeds in interior fields), making heavy cloud-based AI models completely 
unviable for real-time field diagnosis [Cite Source] 
1 Data Point A: e.g. Average daily traffic volume at the selected intersection is 
18,500 vehicles per day, with peak-hour congestion occurring between 8:00 AM 
and 10:00 AM. 
Source:  
2 Data Point B: for example the average waiting time at the traffic signal during 
peak hours is 4.8 minutes, leading to increased fuel consumption and delays. 
Source:  
Feel free to include more key data points. The data points help us to measure the success or 
impact of your suggested solutions by comparing “before” vs. “after”. Choose data points 
carefully because they must represent the real problem and you will ideate to improve these 
figures. 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
State “How Might We…” 
Write three "How Might We" (HMW) statements that define the transition from the 
existing system to the desired system. Each statement should highlight the problem 
your project addresses and the improvement you want to achieve. 
How might we move from (existing system or challenge) to a system that (achieves 
the desired outcome)? 
For example: How might we compress a deep-learning crop disease classification 
model to run efficiently on low-cost Android smartphones with limited RAM and 
processing power? 
1 How Might We 
2 How Might We 
3 How Might We 
Module 1 Resources & Reading Links/Video Links 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
• Thinking in Systems – Donella Meadows 
• The Waters Center for Systems Thinking: waterscenterst.org 
• Understanding Systems: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVoy02xd2Mg 
Video Chapters: 
○ Complexity (00:00) 
○ Hidden Patterns (02:17) 
○ Wicked Problems (06:37) 
○ Understanding the System (09:28) 
○ Systems Thinking (17:37) 
○ Zoom In & Zoom Out (27:48) 
○ Long-Term Impact (28:50) 
○ Feedback Loops (33:01) 
○ Interdisciplinary Collaboration (34:52) 
○ Applying Systems Thinking (35:44) 
○ Modeling (Trends) (36:58) 
○ Leverage Points (39:33) 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 

============================================================================================

Module 2: Systems Mapping & Root Cause 
Dissecting Problems using the Iceberg Model and Stakeholder Ecosystems 
Module Targets/Outcome 
• Understand the problem better from the view of stakeholders and process flows. 
• Apply the Iceberg Model approach to find the root cause of the problem. 
• Differentiate between symptoms and real root causes of the problem. 
Diving deep into the Root Cause Discovery (Iceberg Model). 
Iceberg Model helps you to understand the problem at the root cause. This tool forces your 
team to look beyond the concern or symptoms that are visible at the surface (Event) to see 
the hidden patterns, recurrences and trends.  
These trends (patterns) are a caused by the underlying code, databases, policies, 
environmental patterns, systemic structures or design limits (e.g., infrastructural, spatial, or 
physical limits) (Structures). Structure is how the various parts are organized and arranged 
in the system and how this organization of parts is causing the pattern of events to occur. 
At the root of structures are user habits, cultural or design beliefs (Mental Models) that 
determine how structures are organized and why the system is the way it is. 
In Summary, Mental models define Structure, and Structure drives the behavior of the system. 
Zoom in to Your Scope Area 
Focus only on the part of the system that is within your project scope. 
Identify all the visible events, issues, or situations related to your chosen problem. These 
may be: 
● The main problem itself. 
● Events that happen just before the problem occurs (triggers). 
● Events that happen as a result of the problem (effects). 
● Other visible issues that are directly or indirectly connected to it. These visible 
events/issues can sometimes happen in different time or space but may have a possible 
connection to the main problem. The connection may not be so obvious but should be 
considered in the scope of investigation. For example; rising cases of lung cancer in 
Delhi do not appear to be linked to frequent gas leakage in air conditioners every 
summer, but they are both interconnected events due to the polluting gases in the 
atmosphere in the region. 
Note: At this stage, do not try to explain why these events happen. Simply observe and list 
what you can see happening in the system. 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Example: 
If the selected problem is "Traffic congestion near a college gate", related visible events 
may include: 
● Long vehicle queues during college hours. 
Identify Events & Patterns: 
Look at the events you have identified. 
Some of these events may happen only once, while others occur repeatedly over time. Your 
task is to identify these recurring events or behavior and group them into patterns. 
Look for similarities between the events and ask yourself: 
● Which events happen repeatedly? 
● When do they usually occur? 
● Under what conditions do they occur? 
● Is there an? 
Note: At this stage, you are still observing the system. Do not explain why these patterns 
occur yet. The underlying reasons will be explored in the next step. 
Example: 
If the events include: 
● Long vehicle queues during college hours. 
The patterns may include: 
● Traffic congestion occurs almost every weekday during college start and end times. 
● The traffic congestion peaks during the start of the semester. It subsides during the 
summer break and holidays. 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Stakeholder group identified from Module 1 
Your system is influenced by more than just its users. Select 3 key stakeholders  
Start by identifying everyone who interacts with, supports, influences, or is affected by your 
system. Consider different stakeholder groups such as customers, manufacturers, suppliers, 
partners, service providers, government agencies, and others relevant to your project. 
Once identified: 
● Gather their views through interviews or discussions. 
● Identify what matters most to each stakeholder. 
● Note their needs, concerns, and expectations. 
● Identify what is negotiable and what is not. 
Assign each member of the team, the role of one stakeholder each. Think from that 
stakeholder's perspective and summarize their needs, concerns, priorities, and expectations. 
Note: AI can help you identify additional stakeholders or summarize common viewpoints, but 
always validate the information using your own understanding and research. 
Map the Process & Lifecycle from the perspective of each stakeholder 
Arrange the recurring patterns into a simple step-by-step sequence. This helps you understand 
how the problem unfolds over time. 
Once the process is complete, identify the lifecycle by describing how long or how often the 
process continues. 
Note: Focus on describing the sequence of events. The reasons behind this process will be 
explored in the next step. 
Example: 
Stakeholder Group 1: Students on Bike 
Students Bikes arrive near University Gate – bike stops near the gate and pillion rider gets 
off the bike – bike rider looks for a space by the side of the road to park the bike under the 
shade of the tree. If the road side is occupied, the biker goes to the ground to park. The entry 
to the ground is right opposite the University Gate 2. At the same time several buses and 
private cars are entering the gate 2 from the same median. As soon as the space is available 
the biker turns on the ground and parks the bike. The biker then crosses the road to enter the 
University Gate 2. 
Stakeholder Group 2: Private Car Drivers 
Private cars arrive near University Gate – the cars have permission to enter the university 
through gate 2 which is right opposite the entry to the open ground designated as bike 
parking space. At the same time several students on bike are turning on to the parking 
grounds from the same median. Each bike has 3 or 4 students riding on it. As soon as the 
space is available the cars turn inside the gate 2. The cars have to wait for the pedestrian 
students and bikes to give space for them to turn 
Stakeholder Group 3: University Security Guards 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
The security guards have a duty every morning to keep the traffic moving and not hold the 
other commuters at all times. 
Pattern 
● Traffic congestion occurs every morning before classes begin. 
Process 
● Many vehicles arrive at the same time. 
● Traffic congestion develops. 
Lifecycle 
● This sequence repeats every weekday during college hours 
Identify the System Structure 
Your process didn't happen by itself. 
Something in the system allowed each step to happen. 
Go through your process one step at a time and identify the parts of the system involved. 
Don't limit yourself to physical objects—rules, technology, infrastructure and environmental 
conditions are also part of the structure. 
Example: 
Process 
● Vehicles arrive. 
● Traffic builds up. 
Structures 
● Road width, capacity and condition 
● Entry and exit points on the road and the space between them 
● Number of entry and exits on the road  
● Number of buildings on the road side requiring access  
● The pavement, it’s width and its condition 
● The habits of people using the road 
● Traffic signal. 
● Different kinds of vehicles etc…  
Explore Mental Models 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Every stakeholder views the system differently. 
After gaining clarity on the stakeholders’ views. Instead of explaining your own opinion, 
explain what your stakeholder would believe, expect, and value. 
Once each team member has completed this activity, discuss the different viewpoints and 
identify: 
● Common expectations. 
● Conflicting priorities. 
● Shared assumptions. 
These insights will help you better understand why the system behaves the way it does. 
Example: 
Student on Foot 
Student on Bike 
Drivers in Car 
Events/Patterns    
Structure    
Mental Model    
Stakeholder: Security Guard 
● Wants traffic to keep moving. 
● Prefers students to follow traffic rules. 
Stakeholder: Students on motorcycles 
● Wants to manoeuvre through the traffic freely and safely. 
● Don’t want cars to block them on roads. 
Stakeholder: Students arriving in cars. 
● Wants to arrive at college avoiding minor accidents. 
● Don’t want motorcyclists to overtake them in peak hours. 
Note: Don't limit your analysis to a single type of stakeholder. Consider at least three 
different stakeholder groups from different parts of the system (such as users, manufacturers, 
suppliers, regulators, service providers, or partners) to gain a broader understanding of the 
problem. 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Review Your Project: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Key Data bottlenecks identified. 
Key Process bottleneck identified 
Key Human bottleneck identified 
Reviewing your “How Might we…” statement from Module 1. 
How does your proposed HMW fix the bottlenecks? 
For Example: How does your proposed simulation help find the optimal balance between 
these variables/ How does your proposed hardware design protect against these 
physical/electrical limits/ How does your proposed software 
Bridge these broken links? 
Which bottlenecks can be fixed with your HMW? 
Complete the System Map 
Developing a System Map is an iterative process. 
At this stage, you may want to revisit your system map from module 1 and revise the system 
map with the new information discovered in Module 2. This will complete your System Map 
Module 2 Resources & Reading Links 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
• Open The Waters Center for Systems Thinking: waterscenterst.org — Interactive 
guides and templates for the Iceberg Model and systems mapping 
• Miro Online Templates: miro.com — Free digital whiteboard templates for Iceberg 
Model and Ecosystem mapping 

===============================================================================

Module 3: Causal Loop Diagrams & Leverage 
Module Targets/Outcome 
·        
·        
·        
Understand the core components of Causal Loop Diagrams (CLDs): variables, 
links, polarities (+/-), and feedback loops. 
Construct a localized CLD for a software-heavy engineering system. 
Apply Senge’s System Archetypes to identify strategic leverage points for 
digital/physical/embedded/ parametric or structural intervention. 
Causal Loop Diagram: 
A causal loop diagram is a simple visual representation of how different things in a system 
affect each other. Each factor is connected to another by an arrow, and the arrow tells you 
whether an increase in one causes an increase or a decrease in the other. These effects will 
eventually influence around the original factor again either positively or negatively. This 
forms a loop of factors that cause new factors that affect old one. 
Components of a Causal Loop: 
1.     Variables (nodes): Anything that can go up or down — population, temperature, 
sales, stress, workload, interest rate, etc. Every branch has its own examples. 
2.     Arrows (links): Show cause and effect. An arrow from A to B means "A affects 
B." 
3. Polarity (+/–): 
·    "+" means they move in the same direction (Increase in A → Increase in B) 
·    "–" means they move in opposite directions (Increase in A → Decrease in B) 
4. Loops: When arrows form a closed cycle, you get a feedback loop: 
·    Reinforcing (R): Keeps amplifying change 
Ex: Social Media virality : More views → more shares → even more views 
·    Balancing (B): Keeps correcting change 
Ex: Supply and demand : Prices rise → demand drops → prices come back down 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
Identifying Feedback Loops 
Identify at least one Reinforcing Loop (R) and one Balancing Loop (B) within your 
system. Then, pinpoint exactly where your HMW (How Might We) statement will 
intervene — this point is called the leverage point. 
Steps to identify your loops: 
1.     Find the Reinforcing Loop (R): Look for a chain of causes that keeps 
pushing the problem in the same direction — making it grow, worsen, or repeat 
without stopping on its own. 
2.     Find the Balancing Loop (B): Look for a chain of causes that tries to correct 
or stabilize the problem — but may currently be too weak, slow, or missing 
entirely. 
3.     Locate the leverage point: Identify the single spot in the loop where a small, 
well-placed change could shift the entire system's behaviour — this is where 
your solution (HMW) should act. 
Leverage Points: 
A leverage point is a place within a system where a small change can create a large shift in the 
system's overall behavior. 
Steps to map leverage points on an already-drawn causal loop diagram: 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
1. Study the existing loops — Go through the diagram and clearly label each loop as 
Reinforcing (R) or Balancing (B). 
2. Trace the problem's path — Follow the arrows to see exactly which loop(s) are 
driving the core problem you're trying to solve. 
3. Examine each variable/link — For every node and connection in the relevant 
loop(s), ask: "What happens if I change this?" 
4. Check for weak or missing balancing loops — See if a Balancing loop is too weak, 
slow, or absent — this is often a strong leverage point. 
5. Check for unchecked reinforcing loops — See if a Reinforcing loop is running 
unchecked — intervening here can stop the problem from escalating. 
6. Select the highest-impact, most feasible point — Pick the one where a realistic, 
small change is likely to shift the system's overall behavior the most. 
7. Mark it on the diagram — Clearly highlight/label the chosen leverage point directly 
on the causal loop diagram for reference. 
Matching the System Archetype: 
(Note: A system archetype match means finding the pattern that behaves most like your 
problem. Look at how your problem changes over time — growing, stalling, repeating, or 
worsening — and compare it to each archetype's loop pattern. Pick the one that matches 
your problem's actual behaviour, not just how it looks on the surface.) 
1.     Which archetype best describes your system problem? 
2.     Why does this archetype fit your problem? 
SYSTEM ARCHETYPE REFERENCES 
Archetype 1: Fixes that Fail 
A QUICK FIX gives more power to the 
unintended consequences and the cycle 
continues. 
Example: The Cobra Story from 1800s. The 
Britishers were struggling to invade the central 
regions of Indian continent due to their inability 
to deal with Cobras. They announced a sum of 
money to the locals who would capture and kill 
Cobras. The fix worked and the cobra 
population reduced for some time, only until the 
locals started breeding cobras to make more 
money and the cobra population increased 
again. 
Archetype 2: Limits to Growth 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
The limits to growth structure is based on the basic growth structure. And, as should be 
obvious, nothing grows forever as growth requires resources. Those required resources 
become a limits to growth 
Example: People Express airlines is one of the best-known casualties of the “Limits to 
Success” archetype (see “‘Flying’ People Express Again,” November, 1990). Its tremendous 
growth was fueled by a rapid expansion of fleet and mutes along with unheard of low airfares. 
As the fleet capacity grew, People Express was able to carry more passengers and boost 
revenues, allowing it to expand fleet capacity even more (loop R3). The quality of its service 
was initially very good, so the positive experience of many fliers increased word-of-mouth 
advertising and the number of passengers. 
The Dieting Bind 
The “engine of growth” at People Express was seen as physical capacity — expanding fleet 
size, employees and routes. But its “limit to success” was service capacity — the ability to 
invest time and money in training its employees — which became more difficult to sustain as 
the company grew (loop R4). 
The number of passengers flown eventually outstripped the airline’s capacity to provide good 
service. As a result, quality suffered and it began losing passengers (loop B3). When 
competitors began matching low rates on selected routes, People Express’ market 
competitiveness suffered even more. Focusing only on the reinforcing side of the structure 
turned rapid growth into a tailspin, contributing to the airline’s demise. 
Simply hiring more employees was not the answer to People Express’ service capacity 
problems. Similar to the dieter’s reliance on intense exercise, it only masked the real need for 
the steady long-term commitment to hire and train the necessary people to bring service 
quality up to a high and sustainable level. 
Archetype 3: Shifting the Burden 
A shifting the burden structure occurs 
when there are different ways to address a 
situation. With one approach being easier, 
faster, and requiring fewer resources, 
which do you think gets pursued? The 
problem is that taking the easier path 
ensures one will have to take the easier 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
path repeatedly, and makes it harder to pursue the long-term better solution. 
Example: When you feel tired and take coffee or mid-afternoon caffeine to boost your energy. 
This results in more fatigue sooner. Another round of caffeine can help momentarily but the 
fatigue builds up, eventually reducing the amount of work you can do for the same amount of 
caffeine boost. 
Archetype 4: Success to the 
Successful 
Success to the successful 
archetype represents two 
reinforcing structures which 
may be in a delicate balance 
though as soon as one gains 
a small advantage the 
resource allocation favors 
the more successful and the 
result is then rapidly 
skewed in the direction of the more successful. 
Example: Think of the Monopoly Board Game where the player with more resources is able 
to extract more from others. Rich people keep getting richer while the poor gets poorer when 
rich people have more access and means to pull more resources for themselves leaving less 
for others. 
Archetype 5: Tragedy of the Commons 
A Tragedy of the Commons situation 
exists whenever two or more activities, 
each, which in order to produce results, 
rely on a shared limited resource. 
Results for these activities continue to 
develop as long as their use of the 
limited resource doesn't exceed the 
resource limit. Once this limit is 
reached the results produced by each 
activity are limited to the level at 
which the resource is replenished 
Example: When everybody takes the 
long detour to avoid traffic congestion, 
thinking no one will take that detour, 
ever heard of that? 
And then the long detour becomes 
congested too. 
Module 3 Resources & Reading Links 
Problem Solving in Engineering workbook 
•        Insight Maker: insightmaker.com — Free, open-source, browser-based tool for 
drawing CLDs and running system dynamics simulations. 
•        Loopy: ncase.me/loopy — An excellent, interactive open-source tool for creating 
thinking-in-systems simulations. 
•        Senge's System Archetypes Reference: https://insightmaker.com/tag/systemswiki 
— Quick-reference guide for common system archetypes and their leverage points. 